Source: Climate change.pdf

--- Chunk 1 ---
Donate
©
Climate change
12 October 2023  Reading time: 6 min  (1526 w ords) |
اﻟﻌرﺑﯾﺔ 中文 Français Русский Español
Key facts
Climate change is dir ectl y contributing to humanitarian emergencies fr om heatw aves, wildfir es,
floods, tr opical stor ms and hur ricanes and they ar e incr easing in scale, fr equency and intensity .
Research sho ws that 3.6 billion people alr eady li ve in ar eas highl y susceptible to climate change.
Betw een 2030 and 2050, climate change is expected to cause appr oximatel y 250 000 additional
deaths per y ear , fr om under nutrition, malaria, diar rhoea and heat str ess alone.
The dir ect dama ge costs to health (ex cluding costs in health-deter mining sector s such as
agricultur e and w ater and sanitation) is estimated to be betw een US$ 2–4 billion per y ear by 2030.
Ar eas with w eak health infrastr uctur e – mostl y in dev eloping countries – will be the least a ble to
cope without assistance to pr epar e and r espond.
Reducing emissions of  greenhous

--- Chunk 2 ---
e gases thr ough better transpor t, f ood and energ y use choices
can r esult in v ery large gains f or health, par ticular ly thr ough r educed air pollution.
Overview
Climate change presents a fundamental threat to human health. It affects the physical
environment as well as all aspects of both natural and human systems – including social
and economic conditions and the functioning of health systems. It is therefore a threat
multiplier, undermining and potentially reversing decades of health progress. As climatic
conditions change, more frequent and intensifying weather and climate events are
observed, including storms, extreme heat, floods, droughts and wildfires. These weather7/29/26, 5:25 PM Climate change
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/climate-change-and-health 1/6
and climate hazards affect health both directly and indirectly, increasing the risk of deaths,
noncommunicable diseases, the emergence and spread of infectious diseases, and health
emergencies.
Climat

--- Chunk 3 ---
e change is also having an impact on our health workforce and infrastructure,
reducing capacity to provide universal health coverage (UHC). More fundamentally, climate
shocks and growing stresses such as changing temperature and precipitation patterns,
drought, floods and rising sea levels degrade the environmental and social determinants of
physical and mental health. All aspects of health are affected by climate change, from clean
air, water and soil to food systems and livelihoods. Further delay in tackling climate change
will increase health risks, undermine decades of improvements in global health, and
contravene our collective commitments to ensure the human right to health for all.
Climate change impacts on health
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's (IPCC) Sixth Assessment Report (AR6)
concluded that climate risks are appearing faster and will become more severe sooner than
previously expected, and it will be harder to adapt with increased global heating.
It further

--- Chunk 4 ---
reveals that 3.6 billion people already live in areas highly susceptible to climate
change. Despite contributing minimally to global emissions, low-income countries and
small island developing states (SIDS) endure the harshest health impacts. In vulnerable
regions, the death rate from extreme weather events in the last decade was 15 times
higher than in less vulnerable ones.
Climate change is impacting health in a myriad of ways, including by leading to death and
illness from increasingly frequent extreme weather events, such as heatwaves, storms and
floods, the disruption of food systems, increases in zoonoses and food-, water- and vector-
borne diseases, and mental health issues. Furthermore, climate change is undermining
many of the social determinants for good health, such as livelihoods, equality and access to
health care and social support structures. These climate-sensitive health risks are
disproportionately felt by the most vulnerable and disadvantaged, including women,
childr

--- Chunk 5 ---
en, ethnic minorities, poor communities, migrants or displaced persons, older
populations, and those with underlying health conditions.7/29/26, 5:25 PM Climate change
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/climate-change-and-health 2/6
Figure: An overview of climate-sensitive health risks, their exposure pathways and vulnerability
factors. Climate change impacts health both directly and indirectly, and is strongly mediated by
environmental, social and public health determinants.
Although it is unequivocal that climate change affects human health, it remains challenging
to accurately estimate the scale and impact of many climate-sensitive health risks. However,
scientific advances progressively allow us to attribute an increase in morbidity and
mortality to global warming, and more accurately determine the risks and scale of these
health threats.
WHO data indicates 2 billion people lack safe drinking water and 600 million suffer from
foodborne illnesses annually, with children

--- Chunk 6 ---
under 5 bearing 30% of foodborne fatalities.
Climate stressors heighten waterborne and foodborne disease risks. In 2020, 770 million
faced hunger, predominantly in Africa and Asia. Climate change affects food availability,
quality and diversity, exacerbating food and nutrition crises.
Temperature and precipitation changes enhance the spread of vector-borne diseases.
Without preventive actions, deaths from such diseases, currently over 700 000 annually,
may rise. Climate change induces both immediate mental health issues, like anxiety and7/29/26, 5:25 PM Climate change
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/climate-change-and-health 3/6
post-traumatic stress, and long-term disorders due to factors like displacement and
disrupted social cohesion.
Recent research attributes 37% of heat-related deaths to human-induced climate change.
Heat-related deaths among those over 65 have risen by 70% in two decades. In 2020,
98 million more experienced food insecurity compared to the 1981

--- Chunk 7 ---
–2010 average. The WHO
conservatively projects 250 000 additional yearly deaths by the 2030s due to climate change
impacts on diseases like malaria and coastal flooding. However, modelling challenges
persist, especially around capturing risks like drought and migration pressures.
The climate crisis threatens to undo the last 50 years of progress in development, global
health and poverty reduction, and to further widen existing health inequalities between
and within populations. It severely jeopardizes the realization of UHC in various ways,
including by compounding the existing burden of disease and by exacerbating existing
barriers to accessing health services, often at the times when they are most needed. Over
930 million people – around 12% of the world’s population – spend at least 10% of their
household budget to pay for health care. With the poorest people largely uninsured, health
shocks and stresses already currently push around 100 million people into poverty
every year, with

--- Chunk 8 ---
the impacts of climate change worsening this trend.
Climate change and equity
In the short- to medium-term, the health impacts of climate change will be determined
mainly by the vulnerability of populations, their resilience to the current rate of climate
change and the extent and pace of adaptation. In the longer-term, the effects will
increasingly depend on the extent to which transformational action is taken now to reduce
emissions and avoid the breaching of dangerous temperature thresholds and potential
irreversible tipping points.
While no one is safe from these risks, the people whose health is being harmed first and
worst by the climate crisis are the people who contribute least to its causes, and who are
least able to protect themselves and their families against it: people in low-income and
disadvantaged countries and communities.
Addressing climate change's health burden underscores the equity imperative: those most
responsible for emissions should bear the highest mitigation

--- Chunk 9 ---
and adaptation costs,
emphasizing health equity and vulnerable group prioritization.7/29/26, 5:25 PM Climate change
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/climate-change-and-health 4/6
Need for urgent action
To avert catastrophic health impacts and prevent millions of climate change-related deaths,
the world must limit temperature rise to 1.5°C. Past emissions have already made a certain
level of global temperature rise and other changes to the climate inevitable. Global heating
of even 1.5°C is not considered safe, however; every additional tenth of a degree of
warming will take a serious toll on people’s lives and health.
WHO response
WHO’s response to these challenges centres around 3 main objectives:
Pr omote actions that both r educe carbon emissions and impr ove health: suppor ting a rapid and
equita ble transition to a clean energ y econom y; ensuring that health is central to climate change
mitigation policy; accelerating mitigation actions that bring the g reatest h

--- Chunk 10 ---
ealth gains; and
mobilizing the str ength of  the health community to dri ve policy change and build public suppor t.
Build better , mor e climate-r esilient and en vir onmentall y sustaina ble health systems: ensuring cor e
ser vices, en vir onmental sustaina bility and climate r esilience as central components of  UHC and
primar y health car e (PHC); suppor ting health systems to leapfr og to cheaper , mor e r elia ble and
cleaner solutions, while decarbonizing high-emitting health systems; and mainstr eaming climate
resilience and en vir onmental sustaina bility into health ser vice in vestments, including the capacity
of  the health w orkforce.
Pr otect health fr om the wide range of  impacts of  climate change : assessing health vulnera bilities
and dev eloping health plans; integ rating climate risk and implementing climate-inf ormed
sur veillance and r esponse systems f or k ey risks, such as extr eme heat and infectious disease;
suppor ting r esilience and adaptation in health-

