Source: ipcc.pdf

--- Chunk 1 ---
A Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate ChangeCLIMATE CHANGE 2023
Synthesis Report
Summary for Policymakers
CLIMATE CHANGE 2023
Synthesis Report
Summary for Policymakers
Hoesung Lee (Chair), Katherine Calvin (USA), Dipak Dasgupta (India/USA), Gerhard Krinner (France/Germany), Aditi Mukherji 
(India), Peter Thorne (Ireland/United Kingdom), Christopher Trisos (South Africa), José Romero (Switzerland), Paulina Aldunce 
(Chile), Ko Barrett (USA), Gabriel Blanco (Argentina), William W. L. Cheung (Canada), Sarah L. Connors (France/United Kingdom), 
Fatima Denton (The Gambia), Aïda Diongue-Niang (Senegal), David Dodman (Jamaica/United Kingdom/Netherlands), Matthias 
Garschagen (Germany), Oliver Geden (Germany), Bronwyn Hayward (New Zealand), Christopher Jones (United Kingdom), Frank 
Jotzo (Australia), Thelma Krug (Brazil), Rodel Lasco (Philippines), June-Yi Lee (Republic of Korea), Valérie Masson-Delmotte 
(France), Malte Meinshausen (Australia/Germany), Katja Mintenbeck (Germany)

--- Chunk 2 ---
, Abdalah Mokssit (Morocco), Friederike E. L. Otto 
(United Kingdom/Germany), Minal Pathak (India), Anna Pirani (Italy), Elvira Poloczanska (United Kingdom/Australia), Hans-Otto 
Pörtner (Germany), Aromar Revi (India), Debra C. Roberts (South Africa), Joyashree Roy (India/Thailand), Alex C. Ruane (USA), Jim 
Skea (United Kingdom), Priyadarshi R. Shukla (India), Raphael Slade (United Kingdom), Aimée Slangen (The Netherlands), Youba 
Sokona (Mali), Anna A. Sörensson (Argentina), Melinda Tignor (USA/Germany), Detlef van Vuuren (The Netherlands), Yi-Ming Wei 
(China), Harald Winkler (South Africa), Panmao Zhai (China), Zinta Zommers (Latvia)
Referencing this report:
IPCC, 2023: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2023: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to 
the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  [Core Writing Team, H. Lee and J. Romero (eds.)]. 
IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 1-34, doi: 10.59327/IPCC/AR6-9789291691

--- Chunk 3 ---
647.001Core Writing TeamEdited by
Hoesung Lee
Chairman
IPCCJosé Romero
Head, Technical Support Unit
IPCCThe Core Writing Team
Synthesis Report
IPCC
José Romero (Switzerland), Jinmi Kim (Republic of Korea), Erik F . Haites (Canada), Yonghun Jung (Republic of Korea), Robert 
Stavins (USA), Arlene Birt  (USA), Meeyoung Ha (Republic of Korea), Dan Jezreel A. Orendain (Philippines), Lance Ignon (USA), 
Semin Park (Republic of Korea), Youngin Park (Republic of Korea)Technical Support Unit for the Synthesis Report
iiTHE INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE  
© Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2023 
The designations employed and the presentation of material on maps do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on 
the part of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of 
its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The mention of specific companies or products do

--- Chunk 4 ---
es 
not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by IPCC in preference to others of a similar nature, which are not mentioned 
or advertised. The right of publication in print, electronic and any other form and in any language is reserved by the IPCC.  
Short extracts from this publication may be reproduced without authorization provided that complete source is clearly indicated.  
Editorial correspondence and requests to publish, reproduce or translate articles in part or in whole should be addressed to: IPCC 
c/o World Meteorological Organization (WMO) 7bis, avenue de la Paix Tel.: +41 22 730 8208 P .O. Box 2300 Fax: +41 22 730 8025 
CH 1211 Geneva 2, Switzerland E-mail: IPCC-Sec@wmo.int www.ipcc.ch  Paola Arias (Colombia), Mercedes Bustamante (Brazil), Ismail Elgizouli (Sudan), Gregory Flato (Canada), Mark Howden (Australia), 
Carlos Méndez (Venezuela), Joy Jacqueline Pereira (Malaysia), Ramón Pichs-Madruga (Cuba), Steven K Rose (USA), Yamina Saheb 
(Algeria/France), Roberto Sánc

--- Chunk 5 ---
hez Rodríguez (Mexico), Diana Ürge-Vorsatz (Hungary), Cunde Xiao (China), Noureddine Yassaa (Algeria)
Andrés Alegría (Germany/Honduras), Kyle Armour (USA), Birgit Bednar-Friedl (Austria), Kornelis Blok (The Netherlands), Guéladio 
Cissé (Switzerland/Mauritania/France), Frank Dentener (EU/Netherlands), Siri Eriksen (Norway), Erich Fischer (Switzerland), 
Gregory Garner (USA), Céline Guivarch (France), Marjolijn Haasnoot (The Netherlands), Gerrit Hansen (Germany), Mathias 
Hauser (Switzerland), Ed Hawkins (UK), Tim Hermans (The Netherlands), Robert Kopp (USA), Noëmie Leprince-Ringuet (France), 
Jared Lewis (Australia/New Zealand), Debora Ley (Mexico/Guatemala), Chloé Ludden (Germany/France), Leila Niamir (Iran/The 
Netherlands/Austria), Zebedee Nicholls (Australia), Shreya Some (India/Thailand), Sophie Szopa (France), Blair Trewin (Australia), 
Kaj-Ivar van der Wijst (The Netherlands), Gundula Winter (The Netherlands/Germany), Maximilian Witting (Germany)
Hoesung Lee (Chair, IPCC), Amjad

--- Chunk 6 ---
Abdulla (Maldives), Edvin Aldrian (Indonesia), Ko Barrett (United States of America), Eduardo 
Calvo (Peru), Carlo Carraro (Italy), Diriba Korecha Dadi (Ethiopia), Fatima Driouech (Morocco), Andreas Fischlin (Switzerland), 
Jan Fuglestvedt (Norway), Thelma Krug (Brazil), Nagmeldin G.E. Mahmoud (Sudan), Valérie Masson-Delmotte (France), Carlos 
Méndez (Venezuela), Joy Jacqueline Pereira (Malaysia), Ramón Pichs-Madruga (Cuba), Hans-Otto Pörtner (Germany), Andy 
Reisinger (New Zealand), Debra C. Roberts (South Africa), Sergey Semenov (Russian Federation), Priyadarshi Shukla (India), 
Jim Skea (United Kingdom), Youba Sokona (Mali), Kiyoto Tanabe (Japan), Muhammad Irfan Tariq (Pakistan), Diana Ürge-Vorsatz 
(Hungary), Carolina Vera (Argentina), Pius Yanda (United Republic of Tanzania), Noureddine Yassaa (Algeria), Taha M. Zatari 
(Saudi Arabia), Panmao Zhai (China)Review Editors
Contributing Authors
Scientific Steering Committee
Arlene Birt (USA), Meeyoung Ha (Republic of Korea)Visual Conc

--- Chunk 7 ---
eption and Information Design
“Fog opening the dawn” by Chung Jin Sil
The Weather and Climate Photography & Video Contest 2021, Korea Meteorological Administration
http://www.kma.go.kr/kma  © KMAPhoto ReferenceCover: Designed by Meeyoung Ha, IPCC SYR TSUJean-Charles Hourcade (France), Francis X. Johnson (Thailand/Sweden), Shonali Pachauri (Austria/India), Nicholas P . Simpson 
(South Africa/Zimbabwe), Chandni Singh (India), Adelle Thomas (Bahamas), Edmond Totin (Benin)Extended Writing Team
iiiSources cited in this Synthesis Report
References for material contained in this report are given in curly brackets {} at the end of each paragraph.
In the Summary for Policymakers, the references refer to the numbers of the sections, figures, tables and boxes in the underlying 
Introduction and Topics of this Synthesis Report.
In the Introduction and Sections of the longer report, the references refer to the contributions of the Working Groups I, II and 
III (WGI, WGII, WGIII) to the Sixth Assess

--- Chunk 8 ---
ment Report and other IPCC Reports (in italicized curly brackets), or to other sections 
of the Synthesis Report itself (in round brackets).
The following abbreviations have been used:
SPM: Summary for Policymakers
TS: Technical Summary
ES: Executive Summary of a chapter
Numbers denote specific chapters and sections of a report.
Other IPCC reports cited in this Synthesis Report:
SR1.5: Global Warming of 1.5°C
SRCCL: Climate Change and Land
SROCC: The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate
Summary for 
Policymakers
IPCC, 2023: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2023: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to 
the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  [Core Writing Team, H. Lee and J. Romero (eds.)]. 
IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 1-34, doi: 10.59327/IPCC/AR6-9789291691647.001This Summary for Policymakers should be cited as:
3
Summary for PolicymakersSummary for PolicymakersIntroduction  
This Synthesis Report (SY

--- Chunk 9 ---
R) of the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) summarises the state of knowledge of climate change, 
its widespread impacts and risks, and climate change mitigation and adaptation. It integrates the main findings of the Sixth 
Assessment Report (AR6) based on contributions from the three Working Groups1, and the three Special Reports2. The summary 
for Policymakers (SPM) is structured in three parts: SPM.A Current Status and Trends, SPM.B Future Climate Change, Risks, and 
Long-Term Responses, and SPM.C Responses in the Near Term3. 
This report recognizes the interdependence of climate, ecosystems and biodiversity, and human societies; the value of diverse 
forms of knowledge; and the close linkages between climate change adaptation, mitigation, ecosystem health, human well-being 
and sustainable development, and reflects the increasing diversity of actors involved in climate action. 
Based on scientific understanding, key findings can be formulated as statements of fact or associated wi

--- Chunk 10 ---
th an assessed level of 
confidence using the IPCC calibrated language4.  
1 The three Working Group contributions to AR6 are: AR6 Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis; AR6 Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation 
and Vulnerability; and AR6 Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change. Their assessments cover scientific literature accepted for publication 
respectively by 31 January 2021, 1 September 2021 and 11 October 2021.
2 The three Special Reports are: Global Warming of 1.5°C (2018): an IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial 
levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable 
development, and efforts to eradicate poverty (SR1.5); Climate Change and Land (2019): an IPCC Special Report on climate change, desertification, land 
degradation, sustainable land management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in terre

